From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hansel minutes, a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologist Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number one 42. Recorded
live from South Africa, Wednesday, December 10th, 2008.
Support for Hanselman it's as
provided by Tellerik rev controls
the most comprehensive suite of
components for windows forms and
asp.net web applications. online@wwwdottelerik.com. Support
is also provided by.net developers
journal. The world's leading.net developer
magazine online at www dot
dot com. In this
episode, Scott talks with
and it sales manager from
Johannesburg. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman, and this is another
episode of Hansel minutes, and
I'm here down in South Africa
on vacation for the month
of December with the family.
We're actually staying in Johannesburg.
So rather than a bunch
of technical interviews and things
on Microsoft software, while I'm
down here, I figured I
would do man, on the
street interviews with folks in
Johannesburg that might have an
interesting perspective to share with
you. And today I'm sitting
down with a VC who's.
He is an it sales
manager for a large company
here in Johannesburg. Thanks Lucy
for taking a second to
talk to me. No problem
at all. Okay. So, so
you sell a it hardware
primarily, primarily. Yes, we are.
The company that I work
for is an it distribution
company, but mainly focusing on
hardware and has the earth
I can in the U
S the economy's kind of
really bad right now. There's
been a real slow down.
Have you noticed that slow
down significantly? Yeah. In fact,
today I was just marveling
at the facts of a
slowdown. So how to measure
that is obviously numbers. One
down two is the, the
level of activity in terms
of customers calling in. So
we've seen a significant cut
back in terms of incoming
call volumes from customers. Yeah.
So people just aren't buying
hardware. I mean, you sell
everything from networking equipment to
computers, everything, and they are
buying of course, but they're
not buying as much. So
people don't necessarily have cashflow.
Now. They don't have that
excess cash that they used
to have, perhaps I'd say
last year, at this time,
you know, so yeah, we're
seeing a significant drop in
revenues and we, you know,
we're having to, obviously I
just, the way our business
operates accordingly cutting costs in
laying off people and things
like that. Now in the
States, they always call it
a crunch. They're saying That
businesses run on credit, dude,
businesses run credit here. Do
people have to get a
loan to buy a computer?
They do. In fact, our
business is primarily run on
credit. So we do have
a couple of investors who
work within the company, but
above and beyond that, it's,
it's actually credited it's funded
by the banks. We do
have competitors within our industry
who are self-financed though. I
wouldn't expect that they are
feeling the effects as much
as we are, but yeah,
I think the credit crunch
is here as well. And
this may be an ignorant
question because I'm coming at
it from an American perspective.
But even though South Africa has
been a democracy for now,
maybe almost 15 years. Yeah.
Well, since 94, 14 years
Then, is it a, is
there still a distinction between
a black owned business and
a white owned business? In
fact, there's a program here,
which the government is trying
to push it's called B
E, which is black economic
empowerment. A lot of the
black businesses obviously severely disadvantaged.
So when you start up
a business for you to
secure a loan from the
bank to get your, you
know, your, your capital equipment
and things like that, banks
need some sort of security.
And a lot of the
black people obviously lack the
expertise in terms of running
businesses. They're not from rich
backgrounds, so they can't sustain
themselves financially. So businesses tend
to start up and fold
as quickly as they start
up. So government is trying
to empower black people to
own businesses, as opposed to
work, you know, waiting to
be employed by companies. So
there's a lot of focus
on that even in, in
established businesses, they're trying to
ensure that black people get
exposed at senior level so
that they get a better
understanding of how to run
businesses. So there's a rating
system, which is called the
bee scorecard, which really basically
looks at a lot of
elements within the business. They
look at the number of
black managers and the levels
within the business that they're
in. They look at the
corporate and social responsibility of
the company. They look at
training and development, all those
things that help him, you
know, bring about a more
competent black business or a
black manager that sort of
speak. Yeah. Now in the
States, that, that sounds a
little bit like a, what
they call affirmative action. Have
you guys heard about that?
Yeah. I mean, they, we
use that term as well.
Although here I'd say affirmative
action. It sounds more, it's
more, it's looked upon as
being a derogatory term because
it suggests that the individual
is less competent, but they're
just being put in there
for the sake of their
skin color, you know? So
yeah. Some people call it
affirmative action, but a lot
of the, you know, they
call it B E, which
is really a softer way
of saying the same thing.
But lately, I mean, black
people have shown that they've
got the expertise, we've got
a lot more black people
who are graduating from universities
who hold quite significant qualifications
coming through becoming CEOs of
multinational companies and that kind
of thing. So yeah, we
do have that chair as
well. One of the things
that I've noticed in the
time that I've spent here
is that it seems to
me that the distance between
the people that have, and
the people that have not
is a little greater poor
people are very poor and
rich people are very rich.
And I, it makes me
wonder what would it take
for a, have not to
get a good job and
get a car and get
a house and move on
and become a part of
the middle class. Is it
simply a matter of education
and a nice suit for
that first job interview? Yeah,
I look, I agree with
you that the, I think
that divide between the haves
and the have nots is
quite huge. So the rich
are quite rich. And I
think in today's society here
in South Africa, you know, the
haves are not just white
people. You know, it's not
a mix. It's quite some
number of successful black people
who own a lot of
money who have some significant
businesses yet. You know, on
the other side, we've got
quite a lot of poor
people who are predominantly black
not to get ahead to
get into that middle class.
You have to have some
Forbes sort of education, which
a lot of them lack,
you know, their parents were
unfortunately victims of the previous
regime, which obviously a lot
of people are still angry
about. They blame that for
their circumstances. So a lot
of them find themselves unable
to get jobs because then
their parents couldn't afford to
put them through school. And
so they've obviously doing menial
jobs, which don't pay well.
So they have to find
other means of supplementing their
income and sometimes to crime,
you know, that's why there's
a bit of a hype
in South Africa, but the levels
of crime. But yeah, I'd
say yes, there is a
huge gap where there's a
huge difference between the poor
whom of, of which there
are many of those as
compared to the, to the
rich. Do you know how
to make the possible out
of the impossible? Well, the
dotnet ninjas at Telerik do
they just released a huge
pack of web controls, all
built on top of aspirin
at Ajax, that'll help you
build impossibly fast and interactive
applications in no time at
all. They've made the impossible
possible in desktop development. If
you think you can't have
a carousel component and wind
forms while you can, they're
windows forms, suite features a
super powerful grid view control
on 32 other crazy desktop
components. That'll give you a
dazzling WPF like features, but
in wind farms, they do
the same thing in reporting
solutions with a new design
service, like nothing else looks
just like graph paper, cause
you advanced page layout capabilities
makes it feel more like
a graphic design software than
a reporting solution. Go check
them out@telerik.com and be a
dotnet Ninja. Thanks for listening.
Do you feel that there's
an emerging middle class? Are
people finding a way out?
I mean, I don't suppose
that like, you know, you
manage a team of sales
associates. I don't suppose you
guys sit around at lunchtime
and talk about who grew
up broke in the States.
That's very common though. The
idea that we fancy ourselves
as a meritocracy, that you
can become president as, as
the, you know, the son
of a single parent on
food stamps, that, that kind
of idea that you can
pull yourself up and just
on merit, you can be,
do something great. And there's
not really a stigma. Like
you might be the CEO
of a big corporation in
the U S and you
would tell people, you know,
when I was growing up,
my dad was a coal
miner and no one says,
Oh no, you know, how
can he be CEO? He
was a coal miner. Is
there a stigma to have
grown up poor here? No,
I think right now in
today's society, it's, it's more
like those are the success
stories. That's what they're made
of a lot of people
who grew up studying in
candlelight, for example, you know,
working 20 Ks to, and
from school and today, you
know, they, they, they drive
the big cars. They sit
in huge air conditioned offices
with fridges and, you know,
Oak chairs and whatever you
call it. But I think
that's, that's really the story
of a lot of the
black, how can I put
it? A lot of the
successful black people in the
corporate world today have come
from those backgrounds. So there's
no stigma. It's more like
an expectation. There are a
few who've genuinely come from
enriched backgrounds, black as they
are, you know, but they're
are very few, a lot
of them are rags to
riches stories. So it's kind
of like very common here.
Is there any sense of,
of being threatened or any
of the white people have
a problem with that? I
mean the white minority is
really a, quite a small
minority. What is it? 10%
versus 90%. If I can
just make an example of
my own company where I
work currently, we, because of
that bee story, the company
needed to show that it
was, it was committed to
developing black people or black
managers or so-called blacks with
potential, not necessarily the expertise,
but the potential to learn.
And what they did was
they, we, we have what
we call a workplace forum
as well as an employee
ownership trust. So when you
join the company, you are
in fact obliged to take
a couple of shares out,
which you pay for monthly
in a salary deduction. So
those two bodies have chair,
people who obviously run them.
And it was a decision
of the company that those,
those chairpeople would be black
people who then sit in,
in the, in the board
of directors, although not necessarily
equipped at that level, they
will be put there in
a development capacity. So there
was an outcry from the
white community within the companies
that look, the country has
turned. It's like, now, if
you are a white male,
you have far less opportunities
compared to a black male
up and coming, you know,
so it's, it's unfortunately yes,
there is a bit of
panic on the white side,
but I'd say by and
large, a lot of companies
haven't quite adopted that whole
bee scheme are very few
in government is obviously trying
to crack the whip and
punish in the way of
fines, those companies that it
perceives not to be taken
that seriously. Well, I would
think that, that I'm trying
to put my mind in
the mind of a white
South African, that if you
just look North to Zimbabwe,
to what Montgomery did, he
took a bunch of white
farms and redistributed them. He
took a successful large commercial
farms where maybe one white
family would own hundreds of
thousands of acres, and then
redistributed amongst a bunch of
farmers that may not necessarily
have had experience in large
commercial farming and took basically
all the white people's things
and said, Nope, we're taking
it back and we're passing
it out. I would think
that a South African would
be concerned that the same
thing could happen here. How
much does a South African
look North and look at
that as being either potentially
a potential future or that
may be spilling into, into
South Africa becoming a problem? Oh,
I think especially of late,
they are, they are looking
North far more than they
would have done, I think
in the past. So you
would be aware that South Africa
is obviously going through, going
to be going to the
polls next year, sometime in
April. And there's a great
concern around, you know, the,
the, the, the, the future
leader of this nation and
Jacob Zuma, who is the
president of the majority ruling
party in this country is
the ANC is perceived to
be scandalous. Obviously it's got
issues and stuff that's tugging
him from, from his past.
And the fear is that
he's going to run the
country down into Zimbabwe. You
know, so some of these
schemes that the government is
trying to put forward, you
know, scare people into thinking
that perhaps that's what he's
going to become of this
country. So CGL land, you
know, loss of jobs on
certain races within the country.
And so a lot of,
a lot of people have
decided that, look, they're going
to try their, like a
broadened. We've had quite a,
an Exodus of skilled people
moving away from South Africa out
of fear, more than anything,
going across to the UK,
to the USA and mostly
Australia and New Zealand. So they're,
they're quite, I think that
fear is real and more
so than ever cause a
lot of, and also there's
that threat of obviously, because
Zimbabwe has gone down, a
lot of those skilled people
who were working within that
country have left and they're
moving this way and jobs
are becoming more and more
scarce. And so people are
really, really panicking. Now, things,
you know, in 94, things
were really looking up and
everyone looked to Mandela. And
then after him, Tableau and
Becky who the kind of
the shine came off of
him, it turns out he
wasn't as great a guy,
as we thought, maybe not
as skilled as a worker.
And now this guy, he
said it was Jacob Zuma.
Well, the interim president at
the moment is Halima McClinton.
But Jacob Zuma is the
man who is tipped to
take over officially in 2009.
And his record is unfortunate.
You know, so I am
a black male in South Africa
as well. I'm, I'm registered
to vote next year. And
the question is, who do
I vote for? We do
have a new political opposition,
black opposition that is broken
away from the ANC, which
is providing some sort of
viable opposition. But right now
they're still too new. We
don't necessarily understand at this.
So if I speak for
myself, I'm not quite sure
what they represent. So they're
here to really show us
what they are about because
there were a lot of
the people that have, you
know, that have moved into
this political party are X
agency does. And they're, they're
disgruntled with the way the
previous president was deposed, you
know, from his office. So
they had the opportunity to
fix things while they were
in power and they failed,
you know, so I think
ultimately Jacob Zuma will become
the president because there is
no real opposition. And the
one thing that I know
for sure is that it
will be a black day.
We find ourselves going back
to a white government. It's
not going to happen because
the masses are number one,
voting to keep that from
happening as well. If there
is nothing else that's on
offer, it will be just
skin color. You know, people
vote for the sake of
I'm voting for the ANC.
They fought for our independence.
They represent black people and
they'll vote according to that,
Which is interesting because it's
in fact that same attitude
that caused Robert Mugabe to
be consistently revolted back in
as the, initially in the
eighties, after he led deliberation,
people said, all right, I'm
going to vote for the
liberator. And I'm hearing you
say that they're going to
continue to vote for the
liberator's here in South Africa. And,
and I think that's one
thing that will be consistent
between, let me not even
say between Zimbabwe and South Africa,
I think in Africa, as
a continent, a lot of
our leaders, you that they
are liberator's, they are put
in power and they can
like lose the plot. And
they, they, they want to
stay in power and it
becomes morphic, dictatorship been a
democracy, you know? So Robert
Mugabe, yes, there was some
particularly in the mid nineties,
some significant opposition coming through
in the way of, if
I recall, because I have
lived in Zimbabwe, I am
from there, by the way.
So there was a party
which really, it was a
mixed party, both blacks and
whites, competent people in business,
in politics. But again, for
the same reasons, you know,
that party could not secure
any meaningful influence within the
politics of the country because
people merely voted on the
grounds of the liberator and
Robert Mugabe retained his position
and he thereafter he was
able to crush. I mean,
that part is, we've seen
with what he's doing now.
He's able to amend the
constitution, alter this and that.
And that's how the political
organization died Now in the
U S right now. And
again, supposedly for the last
200 or so years, there's
been a, what we call
a two party system. There
are, there are three, four
third, what they call third
parties, but they're really marginalized
at best, unlike places like
England, or like Canada that
have viable multi multiparty system
for basically a two party
system. Every time in, in
that I hear about governments
in Africa, I hear about
the majority and then the
opposition it's always referred to
as the opposition party. Is
it a two party system
here in South Africa, or is
it just one party? And
then a bunch of other
little guys that are against
them. Interesting. But I think
I'm speaking for South Africa and
my own assessment is that
South Africa is supposed to be
a multi-part multi-party system. However,
it's a, it's really circulation
of the same people who
are breaking away from their
same organization. So initially there
was the, the national party,
which, which ran well while
the, you know, the apartheid
system was still in place.
They went out with the
end of apartheid. The NC
came in. So in my
mind is really a one
party state with a bunch
of other smaller, you know,
opposition parties, which don't really
hold enough combined support to
really make a viable multi-party
system. I wonder if South Africa
forgets sometimes that it's such
a young democracy, Really very
young, there's a lot to
learn. And I think obviously
looking to the first world,
you know, the big nations,
like the Britains and the
USA is of this world.
Yeah. There's a lot to
learn and the way we
sing, the one thing that
I can say now really
made me proud is the
manner in which the country
was able to, to take,
well, let me say use
this. It's it's young democracy
quite openly and fairly in
the way in which a
taboo and Bheki was removed
from office. You know, there
was no gunfight, there was
dope crew. There was nothing
it's all done legitimately through
dialogue and policies and procedures,
you know, and we had
a new president come in,
effectively chosen, you know, by
people in parliament, which included
opposition members, by the way.
And the guy's there today,
and he's doing a hell
of a good job for
now for the, for the,
for the one or two
months that he's been in
office. But I think the
democracy's young, there'll be a
lot of mistakes that will
be made. And especially now
with the, you know, with
the new elections looming, it
was easy back from 94
to two once Mandela left
office, because it groomed Taiwan
baking, but Taiwan, bakery doesn't
seem to have done a
great job of finding a
successor, kind of like what
I see in Zim as
well. Robert GABA has been
the man all his life,
but he's no chosen successor.
And even if there was
right now, I think the
country has gone down the
tubes. You know, that person
would have a hell of
a difficult time. So I
think we can like strike
parallels between Zimbabwe and South Africa
in a sense. Yeah. Thank
you very much, Lucy, for
sitting down and chatting with
me today. I really appreciate
it. Thank you very much.
And I hope you enjoy
South Africa and you get to
experience the hospitality of the
country.  this has been
another episode of Hansel minutes,
and I'll see you again
next week, recording from South Africa.